Hello and welcome back to the course on deep learning today we've got a very exciting tutorial ahead.
We're talking about a long a short term memory or elist PMS for short.
So let's get started.
It's actually going to be quite a saturated trial so we go to our own little plan of attack for today.
Today we're going to first of all look at a bit of history.
So word came from what was the main idea behind it why people invented it.
And then we're going to be talking about Ellis the same architecture.
There's going to be the bulk of our tutorial today so be prepared for that.
And then we're going to have an example walk through.
Hopefully we'll have enough time for that as well.
All right.
So let's get started here.
We've got a problem which we've identified in the previous tutorials we talked about the vanishing gradient
problem.
So in short what happens is as we propagate the error through the network it has to go through the unravelled
temporal loop and as it does that it goes through these layers of neurons which are connected to themselves.
These hidden layers which are connected to themselves and they're connected by the means of a always
called the w w recurrent weight and because the weight is applied many many times on top of itself that
causes the gradient to decline rapidly meaning that the weight of the layers on very far left are a
bit dated much slower than the waist on the other layers on the far right and this creates a domino
effect because the weights of the far left legs are very important because they dictate the outputs
of those layers which are the inputs to the far right layers and therefore the whole training of the
network suffers.
And that is called The problem of the vanishing gradient.
And as a rule of thumb we can see here that if we record small then we have vanishing gradient is large
and we have exploding gradient.
So now how do you solve this problem we talked about we talked about a couple of possible solutions
we talked about clipping the gradient or penalizes the gradient for exploding gradients we talked about
smartly selecting the weights or the ex-state networks which we didn't go into detail on for the vanishing
gradient.
And also we talked about the LACMA for the vanishing brain just if you separate yourself from all this
information on all of this theory and knowledge.
How would you solve a problem like this.
What's the easiest and Fossa solution to.
So if we are w Reyk is in simple terms less than one that we have vanishing gradient if we are w wreck
greater than one we've got exploding green What's the first thing that comes to mind to solve this problem.
Well the first thing that comes to mind is to make W Raechel one.
And that's exactly what was done in the Ellis DM's.
This is a very simplified explanation and there's definitely more to it than just w brekky cause one.
But in general that's the idea and that's all it took.
And when I saw this for the first time I was so excited that you know the solution is so simple it's
really a genius solution that completely gets rid of the vanishing gradient problem.
And so who are the people behind this.
Here are two gentlemen we've talked about Sepah writer and the second person is Jurgen Schmidt Hoeber
who is who was his supervisor during SEPs research or Ph.D..
And so basically they wrote a paper on it in 1987 about Ellis dams and that's when LACMA were introduced
to the world for the first time.
Very exciting topic.
So let's have a look at what they actually are.
So we've got a recurrent neural network right here on ravelled temporal loop.
This is what it looks like.
If you dig in inside the recurrent roll network and right here I want it to do a quick shout out to
Christopher all.
So here is his blog right here a very well-written blog.
Amazing images as you can see.
And we're going to be using the images from this blog in our explanation here so thanks very much to
Christopher for making this publicly available and allowing the use of his images in other works.
So we'll definitely reference this at the end of today's tutorial.
And going back to our presentation.
So here we've got the recurrent neural network and this is what it looks like inside.
And this is where the problem lies.
So this operation that happens here is actually a neural network or operation as we will see further
down.
But simply put as you have outputs coming into your module into this module this operation is applied
and then goes into the next module the pressure is applied and so on.
So as you apply this approach and when you back propagate it goes through all of this and that's where
the weights are applied that's where the wreck is sitting as that weight is applied as it's applied
is applied the gradient vanishes vanishes and vanishes and that means that the weights cannot be updated
properly or fast enough to train the network properly and so the further away you try to look the more
problems you have and the more of the bashin gradient you have.
This is standard Arnon and this is what the T.M. version looks like and I know you might be thinking
that this is super complex.
This There's so much going on here.
And indeed it is a bit more complex than the standard Arnon But check this out.
This is how elist teams are normally displayed in literature and in papers and so on.
So definitely this is the same thing as you saw before previous before but is just a much more convoluted
explanation or representation.
So definitely this option is better and we're going to stick with this one and more so the it looks
it looks difficult now but the goal is that by the end of this tutorial you are completely comfortable
whats going on here and I think thats pretty exciting at this even though this may it may seem a bit
complex now.
Towards the end of the trial hopefully you'll be able to navigate LACMA quite well.
And so before we go deep into what is going on here I wanted to highlight the main point so remember
we said Jurek equals 1.
Well that's this line over here that pipeline at the top as you can see there's nothing much not much
going on here.
There's only like 2 pointwise operations as well understand for the down and there's no complex neural
network led operations are all brought out to this part and that's this is the essence if you're going
to take away one thing from today's tutorial then this is that that you LACMA have a memory cell which
is called the memory cell.
I call the memory pipeline which just goes through time.
And this is as going through time and it can very freely flow through time sometimes it might be removed
and erased.
Sometimes things might be added into it but that's pretty much it.
Otherwise it flows through times freely and therefore when you back propagate through these Alice jams
you don't have that problem of your vanishing gradient.
That's that's the essence of Alice tamps.
All right so now let's dig in a bit more detail so we're going to replace these modules on the left
on the right.
We have something more simple.
This is going to replace them with our representation so C stands for memory a memory cell I guess.
Is your output.
So you can see there's the output going out into the world.
And here you've got your output going into the next module in the next block.
And then here you've got your input XTi.
So basically this is the output from the Prius module which also went into the world but also is coming
here.
So there we go.
So and elist GM module takes in three inputs and has two outputs.
So City NHT because these are the same and the important thing to understand and remember is that everything
here is a vector.
So all of these are this is not just one neuron not just one rally.
There are lots and lots and lots of values here behind hiding behind this war.
This letter XTi and here as well and here as well and everywhere these are all
layers.
So just remember that and we're going to reference them as vectors because that's pretty much the same
thing just lots of different values in one vector.
Remove that and that will make it will allow you not to go down the wrong path in the intuitive understanding
of this just remember that these are all vectors.
And let's go through the legend.
So we've got vector transfers so any line here is a vector being transferred or kind of moving around
in this in this scenario in this architecture.
And yes just kind of to reiterate that it is a vector.
Then you've got a concatenation here.
So here you can see that there's two lines combining into one.
And important to understand that this is done here just to save space and make it less convoluted than
it possibly could be.
But the way the best way to imagine it is you that these two lines are running in parallel logic not
actually combining concatenation means that you combine these two actors on top of each other but I
think it's even easier to understand if you just think of it as in these there are two pipes running
here but they're running parallel to each other.
You've got one pipe and then it goes here.
And the second pipe goes here.
Then these same pipes go here and then they touch that.
So basically you have two pipes running in parallel feeding into these neural network layer layer operations
then you've got copy.
So where do we have copy you have copy here the memories copies go ahead and just copy it here then
this output is copied over here.
Then you've got pointwise operations.
Now we get to the interesting stuff.
So you've got a couple of pointwise operations here that's five of them and the first thing we're going
to talk about these ones the x's the Xs are valves and they all the names this is the forget valve the
memory valve and the output file.
And in literature you will see like letters f v and O.
In the actual formulas representing these valves and so a valve looks like this in the plumbing valve
looks like this and we're going to kind of think of it that way as well.
So you've got water or basically something flowing through and then you can either close it or you can
open it or you can close it to some extent.
Same thing here.
So you've got the forget valve is basically controlled by this layer operation and we'll talk about
that in a second.
And based on the output of that based on the decision made here this wall was either closed or open
so if it's open memory flows through freely if it's closed then memory is cut off and therefore it's
not dozens not transferred further and then new memory just is will be added here probably based on
the results here.
Then you've got the memory valve which again is controlled by a Sigma.
See my sense for the sigmoid activation function that means that that's the activation function used
in these léa operations.
And as the decision is made here this value which is another layer operation which we'll get to in a
second is either added to the memory or is somewhat added to the memory or is not added to the memory
depending on the value that is decided in this valve.
And then again another valve controlled by sigmoid as remember sigmoid or we use the same was because
they're from 0 to 1 and therefore zero sense for no memory no.
Nothing goes through one stands for something goes through.
And then here you've got them valve which is the forget valve since they are not forgetful This is the
output valve and we'll get to that in a second.
We're pretty sure what you're going through the whole network already.
So and then we've got T-shaped kind of like pipe or T-shaped joint.
Why don't we.
I'll show you where that is.
That is over here.
So where you have memory going through and then you can add additional memory if we go back you've got
memory flowing through the joint and maybe some additional memory will be added into it maybe not depending
on the ball.
And as I said you've got the engine operation here that's more kind of like mathematical behind it why
you want to be had between minus 1 and 1.
We won't get into details of that but that's another pointwise operation here.
You have and you've got the neural network layer operations we're here.
That's that's representation.
So basically just think of them as you've got and you've got instead of pointwise pointwise like element
by element of a vector.
You know if you want to multiply vector by zero you multiply every element by 0 or by one or by a certain
amount.
Kind of think of it that way that's a very simplistic way to think about these pointless operations
whereas these ones are a bit more complex you've got layer coming in.
And then you've got a flare coming out or like a lot because again everything here is a vector so you've
got a lair of the sigmoid coming out controlling the valve for each one of these elements in the vector
of memory.
So there's not just one scene where there's many different and that's why you've got a whole layer coming
in.
And then you've got a layer coming on.
These are layer operations.
So just remember that.
And so we're ready to look into this and in step by step and is going to very simple because we've discussed
everything already in terms of hard work so we've got a new value coming in.
You've got memory you've got non-memory you've got value coming from previous nodes and ropes and together
they are combined to try to decide whether this valve should go ahead or should be closed or should
be open though it was somewhat closed or open.
Then you've got these two again combined together on a combined like they again flow in parallel and
then they're combined in in here or in this operation.
And basically it's just them combined it's like there's lots of layers here lots of layers here one
like lots of neurons here not some neurons here and then all of that is basically in one layer operation
is used to decide what value we're going to pass through.
And then also if that value is going to pass or not and to what extent then here we've got the memory
flowing through.
We've got the forget valve if it's closed or and we've got memory valve close or open and we're adding
in some memory possibly if we want to update.
So basically we can let this whole memory fall through then keep this close keep us and open the memory
and change keep this one or we can keep this one close and keep this one open then we can update the
memory completely.
And here finally we've got these two values combined to decide what part of the memory memory pipeline
is going to be output become output of this module is it going to go as fully as the output or to some
extent and so on.
So again these decide that.
So that's how it all works.
Pretty straightforward architecture.
Let's have a look at a specific example to understand this a bit better.
So the example we talked about I'm a boy who likes to learn is that it at cheat intersection to check
if this were girl.
Then here he is Sam Holker caetera rather.
OK it meaning that these two words not just this word would change but also it would affect these two
words so different to in check rather than in English.
So these words are affected by the gender of the subject and therefore in our enlistee and we might
want to store the subject boy in this case in the memory.
So for instance let's say boys start here and then it's just flowing through freely and nothing is changing.
Like if we gaf if our new information doesn't tell us that there's a new subject.
We just have boy flowing through freely and keeps flowing again.
If for instance we have a new subject we have girl or we have we have a name like Amanda or something
else and we understand that we've got a new subject then rules or we'll let this evolve.
We'll close this while say you know destroy the memory that we had then open this wall put a new memory
and then put the name here put the subject on just put in the gender one just put in like female I should
put the whole as much information as we can.
For instance this could be the Arcata is it doesn't have to be like this but as an example we could
put in for instance girl now into this into this pipeline and why would we do that.
Well because then from that we can extract different elements of information we can extract that it's
female we can extract that singular right.
So not just that it's there there's additional information the word girl that is single we can extract
more information we can extract that.
The word girl for instance has four letters were that it was capitalized or wasn't capitalized just
as these are all very very intuitive examples.
Doesn't have to work this way but this is how it could work.
And so then we have the word girl in here.
And so that's how this world works.
And this wall works.
And so what this valve does is it extracts certain information from which you have in the memory.
So for instance if we have no girl in here and for the purposes of the current of the next word or next
sentence that's coming up you might need to know like we saw you need to know the gender.
So then this valve will facilitate the extraction of the gender and that will go as an input into your
next module and it'll help the next module like it will be here.
Decide and decide how to deal with the information that's coming its way how to put it into the correct
form for the female gender for example.
And so that's how the output valve works and what it does.
So there we go that's how the long short term memory works.
And I hope this was a quite an intuitive explanation and now you have a bit of a better understanding
what is what elist hams are like and those of additional reading you can definitely reference the original
paper by our two offers who created elist yams.
Alternatively if you don't want to get that deep into mathematics and into the technical stuff there
is a great great blog by Christopher Ola which we've already mentioned.
Great explanation of Ellis DMD's.
I highly recommend to check it out.
There's a bit of mathematics not too heavy and there's another blog by.
She yawned and asked him about SDM and its diagrams diagrams are a bit more in-depth.
So they're a bit more.
There's a bit more less space saving but there's have been more death might be easier to understand
in some cases.
No mathematics whatsoever just plain intuition.
So also highly recommend this blog to check it out.
If you like to get additional information on elist hymns and on that note I hope you enjoy Teresa Tauriel
and I look forward to you next time.
Until then enjoy deep learning.